Once around, Leighton's star.
So, this little star, also known as
Gleaser 273,
is a small faint star that you can't see
unless you have a decent pair of
binoculars or more likely a reasonable
telescope because it's rather faint.
Magnitude 9.9, well below the magnitude
6 for the naked eye, and probably beyond
even a small pair of binoculars. It sits
in the constellation of Canis Minor, the
small dog, which is made up of, well,
fundamentally a line joining two stars.
I'm not quite sure how you make a dog
out of that, but uh you've got Proion
there, the Alpha star, and then the beta
star marked just above the position of
Leighton's star. Now, the GZA catalog,
that's a catalog of red dwarf stars. And
so, it's obvious that that's what this
is going to be. and a distance fairly
near the sun just 12.35 light years
away.
It was named after the discoverer
William Jacob Liken and he spotted it
moving across the background of stars,
the so-called proper motion, always a
clue to the fact that the star must be
fairly nearby back in 1935.
So, what we know about it now is that it
is considerably smaller than the sun.
It's a class M3.5
star with just 25% of the sun's mass.
Now, that makes it fairly well in the
middle of the range of red dwarf stars.
They go from the smallest possible
ordinary star at about 7.5%
of the sun's mass up to about 60%
And then we have a rather narrower range
that are class K the orange dwarfs 60 to
90% after that they become G-class and
of course that's where we find the sun
at 100%.
But this 25% cutff actually really
should be a separate class all of its
own because below 25% of the sun's mass
the stars are fully convective. So that
means they entirely stir all of the
contents of their cores up through out
into the outer layers and back again and
are therefore able to use all the
available hydrogen. Above 25% they stop
being able to do that and so they will
inevitably have some hydrogen left in
the outer regions of the star by the
time they come to their eventual uh end
of life. So really the classifications
need a bit of updating here I think.
Temperature 3150 Kelvin. So red hot
definitely a red dwarf but we really
ought to have two classes of them above
and below 25%.
Anyway,
I said it was uh about 12 light years
away. And here's a little sort of
schematic with the sun in the center,
the cloud of comets around it. And then
out at about four light years, we've got
Alpha Centuri, uh, AB, and Proxima.
And then other stars. And you can see,
uh, I've talked about some of these in
other videos. In fact, I've talked about
all of them. Ross 128, Arcturus, Former
Halt, and, uh, Alter. So, here's Luden
star off to the left hand side there as
a the red dot.
Now, it's passed us by already. It about
13,000 years ago, it made its closest
approach to the sun on well, at least on
this lap of the galaxy for so for
another 250 million years before it
probably uh stands a chance of coming
anywhere near us again. Of course, by
then both the sun and Ludian star will
have uh been perturbed and likely on a
different orbit.
In space, its nearest neighbor is in
fact proion. So the line of sight of
putting it in Canis Minor is uh not
entirely unfair. It's actually just
within 1.2 light years of proion at
roughly the same distance. I think
Proion is just a little bit nearer. And
we uh can imagine being on a planet
around Leiton star and you would see
proion very bright minus 4.5 for the
magnitude. So rather like Venus shining
in the sky from our point of view.
Whereas the other way round if you were
on a planet orbiting Proion you'd still
be able to see Litton star plus 4.6 for
the magnitude. So it would be uh a
faintish star. Um that reflects really
the massive difference in the power
output of these two stars. Proion more
massive than the sun getting on for
twice its mass burning away furiously.
Whereas Luchin star a quarter of the
sun's mass and running at a very cool
temperature and low output as a result.
Now, not only is it interesting because
it's nearby, but because we have
confirmed some planets. So, two of them
are known to be there for sure, B and C.
And they're roughly speaking Earthlike
planets. B is 2.9 times the Earth's mass
and a little larger. And it's 10 times
closer to the star than the Earth is to
the Sun just going around in an 18-day
long orbit. And as a result of that
closer proximity to a rather more feeble
star, it's getting almost 100% 1.06
times the heat that we do here on Earth
from the sun. So that very much puts
this in the habitable zone. And so is
another example of one of the sun's near
neighbors in space having habitable zone
earthlike planets.
Planet C even more earthlike in mass,
1.2 times our own, but being closer in
and whizzing around every 4.7 days. Uh
that's going to make it quite warm. Um
it's sufficiently close really that this
is going to be a hot house planet.
And we also have two candidates D and E
for larger planets, super Earths, maybe
uh mini Neptunes
at 11 and 9.3 times the Earth's masses.
And you can see the orbital periods
there, several hundred days each further
out. So, this is quite a a nice
interesting star system. four planets
probably and I bet there are more when
we come to being able to detect them
because we're still not really finding
very many planets that are smaller uh
than the earth in terms of mass.
There is an interesting relationship
between B and C that is that um the
orbital periods are in exact lock step 4
to one and that's a situation that we
find with the moons of Jupiter for
example Io Europa and Ganymede are in a
1 to 2 to 4 orbital resonance and this
is of course a great stabilizing factor
in terms of keeping their orbits doing
the same thing each time as they keep
getting these repeated nudges.
So very interesting system indeed and so
much so that we have beamed a deliberate
radio signal to it. The uh project sonar
calling GEJ for Gleaser Catalog 273B.
In October of 2017, the Meti Project and
the Sonar Music Festival in Barcelona in
Spain combined to create and beam a
radio message out to Leiton Star using
the dish shown on the right there in
Norway at Ramajordan.
And um this consisted of a mathematical
tutorial in order to suggest how to
decode the rest of the message plus a
number of messages and indeed some music
from the music festival. Quite what the
aliens are going to make of the music. I
don't know. Um we'll have to wait until
2040 for the reply at the earliest
possible time. If there's anyone there
who happens to receive this message,
pick it up, work out what it's for and
where it was from, and they send a
message back. Well, the round trip time
for a beam of radio waves from Earth all
the way out to uh Leon Star, Gleaser
273, and Planet B and back will take us
up to 2042. So, uh maybe I'll still be
around just uh and able to hear whether
we uh got a reply to that one. I'm not
going to hold my breath. So, anyway,
thanks very much for listening and I
hope you've enjoyed that little whistle
stop tour of a nearby red dwarf star and
its family of planets. Thanks for
listening.